study session 5
start time: 0840
chapter 4

this chapter covers how ethernet has evolved from its once fast 10Mbps to the newer 100Mbps conventions and the differences in topologies. after the very new 10BASE-T and 10BASE-FL standards had led to very fast to the time bandwidth speeds, the newer technological demands had led to them becoming very slow over time - hence the standard 100BASE-T. however, in the beginning, the standard formed two different network topologies: 100BASE-T4 and 100BASE-TX. the first topology, t4, used cat 3 UTP cabling, while the latter, tx, used cat 5 or cat 5e cabling. eventually after some time, t4 lost all market share and vanished, and only tx stayed in the market, and later on the singular topology changed names to the humble 100BASE-T. (this makes me wonder, didnt the cat 3 tp cable have a band limit of 10Mhz? why would anybody even use cat 3 for a 100Mbps networking topology?) the network topology of 100BASE-T remains like the 10BASE-T topology - nodes cannot distance themselves for more than 100 meters from the hub/switch, and only 1024 nodes can remain connected to one switch. the topology is the "star physical, bus logical".
however, its also good to look at why t4 networking actually disappeared, and its even very fascinating seeing how t4 networking even worked. since cat 3 cabling uses 4 pairs of twists and 10BASE-T only used 2 pairs, it was decided that in order for organizations to not need to replace all of their cabling at once, their cables would use all 4 pairs instead, making their networks run in half-duplex mode, resulting in good network speeds but older cable generations. the reason why the t4 faded from market shares was because newer cables were being installed and they were better at delivering good speeds. whats interesting is the t4 convention was just another fascinating workaround of engineering - not the typical organization that offers a solution that doesnt work.
however, replacing a 10BASE-T network with a 100BASE-T network required many things to change in the network and wasnt easy - first, all of the node NICs had to change to newer versions, the cabling conventions had to change for better speeds, and a 100BASE-T hub/switch had to be installed. to make this process just a little easier, instead of swapping out NICs and switches every time, multispeed and autosensing NICs and switches were developed to work on newer network conventions without all the hassles of physical upgrades. this was accomplished with multispeed gear firmware automatically doing most of the job. nowadays, multispeed and autosensing NICs have taken over the market - no singlespeed NIC is findable in the market anymore.
while the 10BASE-FL network had existed before using fiber optics technology, its successor 100BASE-FX has been used in campuses and bigger organizations to fix the issue of distance. while a copper wired TP network might take only 100 meters of distance from a node to the central box, the newer generation of data exchange goes from 100 meters to 2 kilometers, twenty times the length. the FX network looks exactly like its predecessor aswell, using SC and ST connectors ranging in multimode optical levels. the key is to match the technology to the fiber - there are optical multimode categories such as OM1, OM2, OM3 and OM4. there is also 100BASE-SX, another viable fiber optic technology backwardly compatible with 10BASE-FL. however it is long gone.
conventions such as 100BASE-T4 allowed for half-duplex connectivity - meaning that data could only be sent and received once at a time. full-duplex connectivity is a state of connectivity where data can be sent and received simultaneously, allowing for increased bandwidth in a network. newer network generations completely allow for full-duplex connectivity, but this circles back to newer network generations starting from 100BASE-T (not t4, tx only).
fast ethernet is refered to as the network conventions of 10BASE-T and 100BASE-T. however, it may not be ideal for anything above local area networks. once a network expands to further increased data flow and more and more nodes connected to it simultaneously, no matter how fast a switch can be for that specific convention or standard, it will eventually fail at some point of node numbers connected, meaning megabit networking is outdated for more heavy-duty networking tasks, allowing for the newer era of the gigabit networking.
the conventions and standards used for gigabit networking are separated into the categories of 1000BASE-T and 1000BASE-X. while the t standard achieves connections via all the four pairs of the humble twisted pair and allow for a full-duplex fast connection used in most modern organizations today, the other convention subcategories include 1000BASE-LX and 1000BASE-SX. the 1000BASE-SX convention allows for fiber optic cabling usage and has a length limit of around 800 meters depending on application kinds, while the 1000BASE-LX convention allows for distances of up to 5 kilometers, while some manufacturers allow for repeaters that increase the connection limit to up to 70 kilometers. the standards are also trying to use this connection form as the backbone of ethernet technology.
however, its also important to discuss about the different connector kinds for fiber optics. since there are no other standards for fiber optics connector kinds besides the SC and ST market-dominant connectors, there's also the problem of pre-existing issues such as signal loss in connectivity points of a network, hence the newer connector model PC (point contact), which connects cables in a much better way despite of glass impurities. also, there are two newer UPC and APC connectors which get the job done even better.
nowadays, it seems as if the gigabit conventions for ethernet is starting to look slow as well, hence the adaptation of 10GbE (ten gigabit ethernet) - the only problem with this convention relies in its fiber optics side, which is a whole lot of spaghetti to even memorize. long story short, the entire fiber optics 10GbE convention is a mess of multiple standards that all interwine together and in the end all transfer the same unit of data - frames. this means data is truly interexchangable using multimedia cards or other hardware. what is interesting, is how all of these conventions eventually come to play in a moderately genius idea - the backbones in a small network.
compared to the entire internet, a big organization building might relatively keep a small number of nodes and switches. however, whats interesting is a faster than the rest switch with special ports like fiber ports can be used to interconnect multiple switches, where those sub-switches basically run up as normal networks. then, these switches all connect the computers on the backbone - the intented switch to be the true neural brain of a computers network. this area of networking basically forms a WAN - wide area network, compared to the less sophisticated LAN, local area network. switches do come packed with special fiber optics ports to interconnect other switches together. the fun just never ends..
afterall, human greed really never seems to end with data speed. im just joking. the standards for 40GbE and 100GbE ethernet were approved by IEEE in 2011, making for the standards to finally interconnect routers and switches at even faster speeds and more bandwidth. the more the speed increases, its almost as if the neural network model keeps getting bigger in size as well. the entire internet seems to be just somehow connected with such ellegance and beauty that everything shows up to have its own standards, rules, and different speeds. at some point, 40GbE is shown as mostly just using fiber optics technology, because 40GBASE-T networking allows for twisted pair distances of only 30 meters.
this chapter was a massive loophole of a bunch of standards and terminologies of how we went from 10 megabit ethernet, a once famous and fast ethernet speed, to fourty gigabits of ethernet technology. despite being full of jargons, its just fascinating to see how in merely 30 years, we're in a state of moving information via 10GbE underwater cables to other continents.
chapter 4 finished, page 191
finish time: 1035
was this chapter awfully informative? yes.
was it worth it? yes.
