start: chapter 3, ethernet
start time: 0808

this chapter goes over ethernet basics, starting with the terminology. due to the idea of not having to move data by physical demand, the idea of ethernet - the bus network topology running via a coax cable - became real, by xerox. later on, xerox, DIX and intel formed to make the idea more common and prominent in marketing and after some time, the idea was given to the IEEE standards for later on publicity of ethernet itself. then the working group of ethernet made its many sub-working groups, resulting in different generations of ethernet technology, ranging from the 3 million bits per second (3Mbps) to the 10Mbps updated coax version, to the TP cabling convention, to multimode fiber, and to singlemode fiber.
ethernet has had its changes through time. the bus topology had still not been fully made then and there were issues like finding computers on the said network, knowing when each computer should speak, and so on, and all of these issues were fixed as follows: first off, the issue of finding computers was fixed by sending frames with mac addresses to find certain computers. since one shared coaxial cable was used for the entire topology, this meant information would flow freely across every system on the network, meaning if a frame was sent by one NIC, all NICs would grab on it. however, some data was meant for only specific systems - and the problem was fixed by using mac addresses. another problem was knowing when to and when to not send frames, which was fixed as well by CSMA/CD.
a big problem was frame monopolization in ethernet cabling and frame re-transmit. because if one computer sent one very large frame of a word document across the network, it would mean the other computers would not use the cable as easily, or at all - the entire cable bandwidth would be taken by one computer if this issue persisted across bus networks today. the solution was to break the given data into multiple frames, not just 1 - and re-transmit would be made easier this way as well. if a sent big frame had to be re-transmitted across a network and it failed in its first step, the frame had to be sent again, simply slowing down the process or killing it entirely. because of this added efficiency over engineering how frames behave, all networks eventually break down to frames sent across cables, and that doesnt change. in their core, every network does this transmission of frames - not singular bits or bytes - but frames, allowing for intercommunication of different computers. as long as the given NICs are capable of handling frames and their given operating systems support said NIC with proper device drivers, intercomms is possible.
the terminology and modeling of a frame has also changed in this chapter to a more advanced one as well:
1.      preamble        2. destination and source MAC address           3. type         4. data         5. pad          6. FCS
the terms preamble and pad are new - and they are just as fascinating as the rest. a preamble is an 8-byte preceeding value that is sent by the sending NIC and received by the receiving NIC. it gives the receiving NIC time to realize that a frame is coming and when its coming exactly. destination and source macs are used (in a bus topology here) to know which NIC should receive frames, and if the receiving NIC does receive the frame, for that to know how to respond back to the sender NIC accurately. in a bus topology as data would flow freely, it was important for NICs to know whos sending and whos receiving. data types are slight info regarding the data sector of the frame itself; however they give brief info on, for example, if the frame contains IPv4 or IPv6 data. however, types dont explain if the sent frame is a frame belonging to a webpage or a music file. the data itself is the encapsulated form of proceeding layers' jobs, but this still depends heavily on how many layers a network may consist of. in a simple network in the 90s, a computer may not even have had GUI, meaning most computer software ran on CLI and most layers (atleast 3 from the top) would simply disappear. however im not sure with my statement because layer 7 simply provides enhancements and improvements via application programming interfaces to enhance their networking capabilities - and networks may not need GUI to use networks. padding is simply used because a frame minimum size is 64 bytes - if the frame is not at minimum 64 bytes, padding is used to fill a frame up with data. and finally, the frame check sequence which uses a 4-byte cyclic redundancy check and checks if a transmitted frame is still holding up to its values.
with the bus network topology and its later form the star-bus topology, the IEEE set out rules, standards and ways to connect computers to each other on different networks, with the first standard coming out for the 10BASE-T network. the name can be easily broken down into its characteristics: 10 for the speed of the network (10Mbps), BASE for the network type baseband, meaning only one signal can be transmitted at a time, and T for cable type - twisted pair. this network was the first network kind that emerged with IEEE standards, and it worked quite simply: use UTP cabling with some computers connected to each other via the NIC, and add in some limitations regarding the star-bus topology: no more than 1024 computers can be connected on a 10BASE-T network (itd be stupid to invest on a hub with 1024 computers connected) and the UTP cable connected from the hub could not exceed a 100 meter range. this network needed two pairs of the TP cable for the network to work, but everybody bought 4 pair cables believing the networks would implement usage of all 4 pairs later on, and they were right. one pair in the TP cable is used for sending and another pair for receiving in the 10BASE-T network. the RJ-45 or 8P8C connector has 8 slots for inserting cable wires into its mouth. the connector is sometimes called a crimp, the act of connecting a wire to its crimp is called crimping, and the tool used for crimping is a crimper. the layout for connecting cables to a connector is used with the colors green-green/white, brown-brown/white, orange-orange/white and blue-blue/white, and the standards for connecting them are two different ones. make sure to memorize the standards! (standards 568A and 568B)
the older NICs were not capable of sending and receiving data before - but newer NIC models allow for full-duplex transmit. the NICs before were called half-duplex NICs, and they were much slower compared to the newer models. in a summary, the 10BASE-T network has the speed of 10Mbps, limits of 100m distance of cabling from the hub and only 1024 computers connected to one network - the topology uses the physical star and the logical bus. cable type ranges from cat 3 but newer better cables are used as well, such as cat 5.
a few years after the introduction of the 10BASE-T network, the 10BASE-FL network was introduced by replacing copper with the 62.5/125micrometer fiber optic cable with the SC and ST connectors. this new adaptation was because of the limitations of copper wiring - copper had distance and EMI issues. while a copper cord couldnt go further than 100 meters from its hub, the fiber solution completely disbanded the issue and increased distance from 100m to kilometers - tens of times the older distance. then the EMI issue was completely disbanded as well because fiber didnt transmit data with electric currents, but transmitted data with impulses of light. again, the limits of 1024 nodes connected to hub plays a limitor's factor besides the 2000 meter distance from node limit, with a 20x distance factor.
in the bus topology and star-bus topology for networking, collision was quite common. when multiple computers tried to send info on a single wire simultaneously, it'd result in both data simply colliding and cause transmission drops. this was later on fixed by CSMA/CD: carrier sense multiple access/collision detect. since multiple nodes used a single wire, it was called multiple access - and if every system tried to send a frame at once, collisions would be more common than ever. however, wires use different times of transit now - meaning collision is much less common. now, if we imagine a scenario where both nodes on a transmit line notice the wire's empty and they both try transmitting data, they collide again - but both of them come up with timing for re-transmit - a random time to avoid re-collision. this makes up wait times and prevets node frame recollision.
with the increase of a network's nodes, the collision domain increases - meaning the more and more messages have to be sent and collide, at some point the network's collision in transmission is more common than the actually-transmissioned messages. this issue was fixable by using bridges in older networking, but soon switches arrived. switches broadcast one frame message to learn the mac addresses of every node and based on that mac address, they create an on-the-fly full-bandwidth connection for the communicating nodes on the network. the problem in hubs were that they never learned the mac addresses of each node - they simply constantly broadcasted messages; but switches filter data based on mac addresses, meaning they give collision domains as each made connection in and out of themselves instead of making the entire node connections a singular domain.
however, the idea of switches is so prominent and common now and organizations might need more than one single switch in their network infrastructure, so they leap in towards the act of using multiple switches. this is done in two ways: older switches used uplink and crossover cables, while newer switches use autosense to automatically know switches are at play.
1. uplink is used as a specific port on older switches. it is used to connect multiple swithces together.
2. crossover is used by using one standard for one end of an 8P8C connector and another standard for another end of the cable. this causes a reverse in the sender and receiver wires on the cable, allowing for a connection to be made on the switch infrastructure. however, newer autosense-equipped switches can use normal TP cables. crossovers can also be used to connect two computers to eachother, but wireless connections (remember, mesh topology from yesterday!) are more common now.
chapter 3 finished
finish time: 1632
