study sesison 8 starts here
start time: 0835
start page: 250

so far we've gone over a basic network topology for a single floor and laid it all out mentally, then installed it physically with all of its hassles and we even did this for multi-floor buildings. now, we're at the point where after running cables, its time to test them. lets hope this chapter finishes today, because the mere 80 pages for one chapter was brutal.
when installing cable runs, testing them is critically important. testing them goes down the fact that if a cable cannot transmit data as fast as it advertises to do, it means there are signal degradations or interferences happening. overall, there are many different causes for interferences and the effect is simply interference - where a data transmit medium (copper or fiber) is unable to transmit data and get it to the recipients properly. testing cable runs includes the many many complex steps and protocols laid out by the TIA standards which also requires quite expensive complex testing equipment which can run up to thousands - even tens of thousands of dollars. while there are different methods of troubleshooting and testing different kinds of cables, theyre all explained below:
1. troubleshooting copper:
        a. how long is the cable? if too long, it can degrade transmit signals.
        b. how much noise is there in the transmit medium? there's always noise in signal transmit, but too much is bad.
        c. is there a point of cabling where crimping is not done properly?
        d. are there any shorts? are there wires in the runs that are exposed against their jackets that touch eachother?
        e. are all the wires terminated correctly in their point of connection? (bent pins in patched areas like wall outlets)
        f. are there any EMIs relating to either electric or radio devices in the surrounding or to other cables (split wire)?
testing copper requires multiple devices - one of them is a cable tester device, which typically tests to see if a run on both ends has no problems such as connector issues where crimping happens. this device typically costs alot, but there are cheaper solutions like continuity testers which only test if the cable is able to transmit data or not. cable and run testers are more expensive, but they give a lot of more information regarding a single run, therefor definitely being worth the pay. other devices which display more informations are called microtesters. other devices which go even higher in prices typically go for as much as the range of $400, offering even more capabilities such as enabling the troubleshooter to understand where a wire is short or if there are any crossovers or anything else, to the point of even determining cable length. these devices are called time-domain reflectometers (TDRs). these devices enable the test of even installed cables.
when using troubleshooting devices that reach the very complex standards of the TIA, the prices shoot up really, really fast; however, some high-end devices are capable of measuring details and variables which the typical low-end device may never even be used for. a good example is crosstalk - in copper cabling, crosstalk has been discussed before. as mentioned before, a twisted-pair cable is designed in a way to be twisted more and more to reduce its crosstalk. when signals are sent down one pair of wire, they themselves produce electromagnetic interface for the other cable pairs in the same tube (a UTP cable has 4 pairs), hence the near-end crosstalk compatibility test (NEXT test). even low-quality crimping, low quality crimps or anything like that generate crosstalk, and the generated crosstalk increases fundamentally in crimp areas no matter what. (though this makes me think, are advertised network speeds really just math equations compared to real-life network scenarios where even perfect crimping, extra connections and everything cause extra crosstalk, reducing network speed?)
the near-end crosstalk test is genius. it works like this: a testing device connects to one end of a wire, sending a normal-strength signal down the wire. another connected device on the other end of the cable connects to the cable, testing to see how well the signal has traveled across the medium. there is also the far-end crosstalk test which tests to see how other wire pairs in the same cable run behave under crosstalk. two test devices connect to both ends of a run, one of them sends normal-strength signals down pairs 1 and 2, while the other end's device listens to wire pairs 3 and 6, looking for crosstalk. both NEXT and FEXT (far-end crosstalk comp.) are measured in decibels (dB).
another common issue with copper cabling is attenuation. as a cable becomes longer, the transmitted signals become steadily weaker. testing cables is done by a network certifier, a person with all the expensive tools and cool stuff on his pant belts. typically, this job is done by the certifier themselves, and it is done by someone like the network installer and the certifier runs tests, prints them on a paper and hands it to the network installer for the network installer to show to the customer to prove they've done a good job. (good job, network installer! even if you fucked everything up, running cables through roofs deserves hazard pay.)
when talking about signal loss across a cable, the term decibel is used to measure network disruptions in easier-to-understand terms. to explain it better, signal interference is a result of imperfections in mediums or in how data is transmitted. the signal loss can either be a tiny bit or an overwhelming amount, going from 0.00001% to 10000%. the term decibel (dB) is used to refer to signal interference and make it easier to understand. a technician would know that signal interference of 3dB is much much less than of 10dB.
2. troubleshooting fiber
        a. are the connectors connected properly? many issues regarding fiber transmit are caused by connector mismatch.
        most connectors which fiber optics cables use, and their surroundings, can create signal loss via the fact that signal transmitters in fiber optic cables are merely micron-size-thick, meaning an incorrect insert can cause a lot of signal loss. i dont think anything can be done about this.. how the fuck would you identify hair strands inside a cable and properly connect both ends to each other? you cant use a microscope there.. or could you?
        b. is the cable longer than it should be? typically, the ranges for fiber cables are long, but dispersion is still serious.
        dispersion is a serious problem in fiber cabling. even though fiber cabling can be tens of times of copper cabling length, it does not merely mean that cable lengths can be impossibly long across multiple buildings. cable limitations play an important role in how networks play out, and a proper network installer, despite of all of the random standards set by manufacturers, must know how to install fiber cables.
        c. is the modal dispersion of the cable proper? if a fiber cable is mishandled and bent, it can cause light leakages.
        modal dispersion is another severe issue with fiber cabling. even though fiber cables are immune to EMIs, theyre definitely not immune to humans - really misinformed or non-informed humans who have no idea about networking. when we discussed secured cable installing and all of its standards, we realized that most issues regarding networking happen in the work area - hence the huge issue of bending fiber cables. trust me, old man, just because you bent a fiber cable, it wont illuminate the whole street with light!
        d. are the proper physical transcievers and signal wavelengths acknowledged?
        when installing fiber cables and connecting them to switches, it is important to know that different connectors require different kinds of transceivers for different usages. using a mismatching transceiver would just mean the network wouldnt work at all, because data conversion isnt really happening right. there is also the issue of mismatches in signals - if devices do not match signal descriptions, networks would just not work right.
fiber optics installing is a very very involved process required to be done by true professionals in the field. not anybody can do this job - it has really expensive tools like fiber fusion splicers (tools used for connecting two different cables to each other without causing loss, last time price checked it runs up to even $1000!) and other tools which make the job easier - however, overall fiber installs are a mess. 
the final thing to do with a network is to install its network interface cards on the machines responsible for acting as nodes in the network. of course, compared to maybe installing micron-large fiber glasses or running UTP cables through roof tiles, this is definitely a bliss. you only need to identify what kind of network you're using and buy a NIC regarding that network. for example, most computer motherboards nowadays come with a built-in NIC supporting copper-based networks. some motherboards might need support for a fiber-based NIC which comes in various brand names and advertised goods and bads. NICs also require the install process - you need to put a NIC inside a computer for it to work, dummy. typically, newer NIC models are installed in PCIe expansion slots. PCI expansion slot numbers may vary on different motherboards, some of them might let you connect multiple NICs simultaneously.
switches also enable use of multiple NICs on one system, a term called bonding or port aggression, which lets multiple file transfers or multi-port network activities (running something like firefox and another network-related program simultaneously). this does not increase network speed alone, but instead increases the bandwidth alot. to do this, identical NICs should be used to avoid mismatch issues regarding identifications in the network peripherals. the protocol used for controlling this manner is called the LACP - link aggression control protocol. it controls how multiple network devices send and receive data across a single node.
one of the biggest helpers in network diagnosis in NICs is the LEDs used on the NICs. some NICs have different numbers of lights, but the most fundamental one is the link light, used for diagnosing if the node is even connected to the network or not. there are also other lights such as connectivity lights or speed lights. each NIC manufacturer uses its own standards and rules to define how lights work for it, but overall, the lights used typically inform the troubleshooter of the same thing. some link indicators even display multi-speed lights showing how different network speeds might not interconnect with eachother on the same network.
the rest of the chapter goes over troubleshooting the network for its issues. id prefer to keep this entire section as limited as possible, because honestly the troubleshooting methods mentioned are not too complex or hard to understand. what i did love, though, was the idea of UTP coupler connectors being used for UTP cable length limit extensions. i guess i got my answer for my question in the previous study session note.. and of course, in the telecoms room, it is important to make sure that the diagnostics are kept in an orderly fashion, and things like voltage recorders, UPSs and their different kinds to buy and so on are important, not to mention humidity trackers which are tasked with checking air humidity in a telecoms room and reporting them.
out of the 10 tests on chapter 5's ending page, i answered all of them correctly. chapter 5 is officially over.
study note 8 ends here
finish time: 1037
finish page: 285
