study session 10 starts here
start time: 1523
start page: 294
so.. lets continue from where we left off at chapter 6. in the previous study note, we discussed how a protocol suite was made globally standardized by the TCP/IP protocol suite, how TCP and UDP both work, both of their downsides and higher advantages, ICMP, and so on. from here, we'll apparently discuss how a local area network is set up just by using the protocol suite, a switch and a bunch of nodes. but before that, lets quickly review what we learned last session to make sure everything's clicked:
1. we learned how in the 90s, computing and networking were separate topics in which every major company hosted their own protcols and software suites to make their own formal networks, basically ruining the idea of a proper internet. the only protocol suite that managed to survive the claws of time was the UNIX protocol suite "TCP/IP", which aimed for many goals besides just sharing a bunch of files on a network.
2. we learned how the TCP/IP protocol suite internal protocols work - IPv4, IPv6, ICMP.
3. we discussed the fundamental packet internals, how a TCP segment works and a segment's internals such as the source and destination ports, the checksum and the TTL, and the packet IP format specifier, the packet size, the three-way handshake and why it matters to form the proper distinction between TCP and UDP.
4. we saw how the packets are handled in a higher level of diagnostics in the book's own pages and how the three-way handshake is accomplished between different points, even though i honestly dont remember every line of the wireshark output log.
now that that's out of the way and i know i havent forgotten anything after losing 2.4kg in a 7 hour hike yesterday (i bet there were some brain juice in that 2.4kg), lets get to the topic: how TCP/IP works out in a local area network, or a LAN. first off, we need to understand what a LAN is. a LAN is the acronym for the term "local area network" - however the definition alone doesnt really describe its true topology. a LAN can be anything between two devices in a single apartment floor, or a building with 200 devices connected to each other on a campus. the idea is that a LAN is covered in a small area compared to other network faces - and from multiple LANs connected to eachother a WAN - wide area network - is formed. 
before going over how the wide area network is formed under TCP/IP, its good to understand how multiple computers over a local area network communicate with each other. as mentioned before in chapter 1, if multiple computers wanted to communicate with each other over a network with that "special" box terminology (the newer hub, or switch), they needed eachothers mac addresses. this was accomplished by a node sending a broadcast request over the cable to the hub, and the hub broadcasting the message over to every single node on the network until the proper node eventually picked it up and replied back. so the process looks like this:
1. node 1 is looking for node 3 to send cat pictures to, but doesnt know node 3's IP address.
2. node 1 sends a broadcast message looking for node 3's physical hardware mac address.
3. node 3 receives the broadcast message, sends its MAC address over to node 1.
4. node 1 and node 3 now have eachother's mac addresses, yippies! everybody can have cat pictures.
this is a very simplified version of how the broadcast works. if we want to use the same methodology over for the full version and all of the important details, it would look like something like this instead:
1. node 1 wants to send cat pictures to node 3, but node 1 does not know node 3's MAC. but it knows its IP address. (note: this is something being done for the firs time in this LAN - nodes 1 and 3 dont know anything about their physical addresses, and this is just a simple example of maybe 3 or 4 computers connected to each other over a switch.)
2. node 1 broadcasts a lookup message over to the switch with the address FF:FF:FF:FF:FF:FF - the universal MAC address. the switch then forwards this broadcast to every connected node to the network, and eventually, out of sheer engineering, node 3 sees the broadcast with its IP tagged inside of the broadcast, and sends its MAC address to node 1's address. 
3. node 1 and node 3 eventually keep repeating this same send-and-receive game until they both have their IP addresses and MAC addresses. this process is known as the ARP request and ARP response phase, where different nodes communicate with each other to learn their MAC addresses. the important realization clicks here: MAC addresses dont change for hardware, but every MAC address is stored in the cache of each system. this cache choice simply happens because its the more rational choice of where the information is stored, and how it is stored. network information might change over time, and simply doing this transaction is much better than ruining the entire internet with false information.
4. once node 1 has node 3's MAC address, it sends cat pictures on email to it over on the switch. also, the process of ARP is an acronym for adress resolution protocol.
the most common form of IP address, or IPv4, is a 32bit-long set of numbers. it is a better successor of the humble mac, simply because using mac addresses across a global network like the internet would flood the whole place with broadcasts and leave no room for people to send frames in. instead, whats made is IP addressing - the future of networking. each IP address is a logical address assigned to software - not hardware - for more flexibility over a network. IP addresses can also be grouped together to distinguish multiple LANs from one another, making the possibility of forming easier WANs. a typical IPv4 address looks like this:
01010101110011000011001111000011
a 32bit stream of binary 1s and 0s. this stream is later separated with 3 periods to make up for 4 sections of 8 binary digits:
01010101.11001100.00110011.11000011
then, each binary section is translated from the binary to the decimal value of a number between 0-255:
192.168.122.199         -->     this is the final product; the typical decimal-dotted notation of an IPv4 address.
calculating the binary 8-digit value into a proper human-readable decimal is a critical task that can be done in 2 ways:
1. calculator: for a calculator to convert decimal to binary and vice-versa, the calculator must be pre-made with a programmer's interface future which enables the calculation of different number bases, from decimal to binary and from binary to decimal. this can be achieved easily with mainstream calculators. for linux, however, there are always a shit-ton of programs to choose from. for me, the 'calc' program gets the job done. i use it on a daily basis and its a terminal-based program. to convert the numbers from binary to decimal, i simply enter base(10) and then enter my number in binary. if vice-versa, i do base(2) and enter the number and get my result. its a very neat program and its easily installed on most linux distros!
2. human intellect: use the formula below:
when calculating base(2) numbers, the core idea is that there are 8 numbers starting from 1 which keep doubling, which ends up looking like this:
1       2       4       8       16      32      64      128
when you place a zero under each of those, they cancel out and leave their value behind. when you put a 1, it activates their value and the sum of those represents the number in binary. for example:
1       2       4       8       16      32      64      128
1       0       0       0       1       0       0       1
1 + 16 + 128 = 145
and if you need to, you can also use the conversion in a vice-versa situation. its pretty easy, so make sure you learn it well. its a must-know for every network engineer!
for an IP address to work properly, no two systems on one network may share the same IP address. even though IP addresses are a method of logical addressing in contrast to MAC addressing, they still cannot share one IP address across multiple nodes on one network. when discussing how a LAN forms under an IP address, it is important to know the internals of the LAN itself. for a LAN to work with IP addresses, every node that is connected to a local switch must end that switch connection with a router. a router is a device that determines which packet goes to which device on both a LAN and a WAN. however, a LAN must have a way to be distinguised from another LAN. this is done in the simple terminology of how the digits of an IP address play out on a network. for example, a network which uses TCP/IP might have multiple devices with different but quite similar IP addresses such as the example below:
node 1: 192.168.122.155 ---|
node 2: 192.168.122.154 ---\__  as you can see, every node shares the first three decimal digit
node 3: 192.168.122.134 ---/--  sections of the IP address: 192.168.122.x.
node 4: 192.168.122.78  ---|
in this scenario, the network ID, used for distinguishing LANs from one another, is address 192.168.122.0, which determines the network ID. every network ID must end in zero, where every host ID is between 0 and 255 (255 is used for a specific broadcasting technology). while network IDs end in 0, no host ID or IP can end in 0. this is a rule set out by the TCP/IP protocols. another critical rule for a LAN network to actually work is for it to connect directly to a router. without a router a TCP/IP network would not work. a router's job is to route traffic (packets traveling across multiple LANs) to the correct LAN which might be outside of the network that your LAN covers. a LAN is also called a default gateway, because it is the gateway for multiple LANs to talk to each other. the router itself must also have an ID which connects it to the network itself, whereas if a LAN is supposed to have the IP address 11.22.33.x, the router is typically assigned either the lowest or the highest number in the network itself, like so: 11.22.33.1, 11.22.33.254.
a router's primary acitivty is done via a routing table - a table in which it is specified for the router the location which certain data should travel to. a router itself is responsible with both covering up data in the LAN itself (sending and receiving of packets in different systems) and covering up (routing) data from one machine or one LAN to the rest of the internet. it is really simple: traffic which is meant to be transfered from one machine to another over a small network can be done with MAC addresses while bigger areas of networking or more flexible networking scenarios use the help of routers with TCP/IP protocols.
finish time: 3 days later, 1304
finish page: 312
study session 10 finishes here
