study session 6 starts here
start page: 192
start time: 1110

this chapter, chapter 5, seems to go over some of the physical limitations of a network topology and how it lays out in buildings. when a network topology is laid out, there are multiple problems regarding how cables are laid out, how NICs seem to look to other people, and how everything should be laid out to withstand the temptations of the normies who cant cook up magic networks.
to design a proper network in a building, the most fundamental issue is with how cables are laid out across something like walls or different floors. different bodies of organizations like the TIA or the EIA have come up with different standards across the united states to agreements and standards regarding how such cables are laid out, while bodies in the EU have also adopted some of these standards and used them themselves in their own standards. this chapter doesnt turn someone into a network designer - rather, it gives info needed to know how a system can be possibly laid out, making it a valuable chapter, atleast in my opinion. the simplest kind of network anybody could probably make up would be the star-bus network - some computers, a switch (not with 48 ports, maybe with 5 or 6), and some computer systems. the switch can rest easily on a table where the laptops are located, some UTP cables can be used to connect the computers and other stuff to the switch, and finally, something as simple and as flawless of a network is made up until the point where someone trips over some wires on the ground or some change has to be made to the network, causing issues. if, as mentioned, a cable such as the humble UTP is used, EMI can be very effective, causing network interference from other devices located in the same area. even though the network can be refied with STP cabling, a budget might be a limiting factor - hence the standards to lay out a proper network with certain standards.
the first thing to note is that for a network to be properly set, there need to be 3 things:
1. work environment             ; a place (maybe a cubicle) where people work in, called a work environment
2. telecommunications room      ; a room separated from the work environment that hosts cables, switches, etc.
3. horizontal cabling           ; cabling that is laid out horizontally from the work environment systems to the telecoms room
essentially, by separating cabling from the work environments, most of the interrupts made by people themselves disappears. the remaining issue is how the horizontal cables (each cable that goes from a work environment to a telecoms room is called a run) makes its way to its home. cabling and how runs are placed and layered are all standards regarding cabling categories (for a copper-based cabling systems), fire ratings for cables, pair counts for cables, and so on. fiber optics layouts differ, where they run multimode fibers across devices.
for choosing what kind of UTP cabling to even use in a building, we should also pay attention to different wire kinds. for example, a UTP cable has two different types: the stranded core and the solid core. when referred to as "core", the idea is the wiring used in the cables, down to its core.
1. solid core: the solid core UTP cabling is a wire state where one singular wire runs down a cable. this cabling type is very good at conducting but cant be handled too hard, or bend too much.
2. stranded core: this cable has, at its core, multiple smaller wires stranded together. this leads to a typically less conductive behavior but more bending and handling room.
choosing what kind of UTP core to use goes back to what it is being used for in its application form. for example, solid core UTP cabling can be used in applications of walls or the roof, where feet and hands are less likely to reach, making them a good source for better electric conductivity compared to the stranded core wires. using category ratings for cables in standards is very important - newer technological advancements suggest using at least cat 5 cabling - and if affordable, even better cables are recommended, due to how technology is constantly evolving. cat 4 or 3 cabling must not be used in walls or roofs, where its hard to reach for cabling.
while cabling and everything might be nicely done, a very common problem that we arrive at is the problem of how the intermediate distribution frame (IDF) or the telecoms room is organized. if done incorrectly, the pile of runs that come from the work areas might turn the process of maintaining everything into one giant mess, therefore TIA/EIA standards have also distributed solutions for telecoms rooms.
one of the main standards that the EIA/TIA has enrolled has been regarding racks - a solution to store network-related media on a platform with a width of 19 inches as a standard. all racks are 19 inches wide, but their heights are related to what they are for. every equipment has typically a height measured in 1.5 inches, and that is considered to be a Unit, measured in Us. for example, a switch with 48 ports might be 1.5 or 3 inches tall; if its 1.5 inches tall, its 1U. if its 3 inches tall, then its 2U. every rack unit makes up for its total height - if the network equipment in a network has already been decided, then the rack should be bought for its appropriate height. however, all this considered, there are multiple rack types. some racks are installed with screws on walls to store lesser equipment while some of them are short, while some of them are free-standing. if something happens to a network where power supplies are totally shut down, UPSs (uninterrupted power supplies) are used to prevent data loss or hardware failures. also, racks come in with PDUs (power distribution units) to support power supplies for every rack component, which directly connects to a wall outlet to provide electricity. another important aspect of racks and how they should be maintained is for them to have proper air flow. a bad current of air flow might damage equipment very terribly, leaving in a lot of cost, and another aspect to take into consideration is rack security. racks typically come with locks with different methods - some are biometric, passworded, or just have analog locks.
a very fundamental (atleast in my opinion) part of racks is patching cables and it is fundamentally a massive security and organization upscale factor which is basically dirt cheap compared to its preventing factors' backfire situations. for a network to actually work, solid core cables run through walls and roofs of a building to support better ethernet conductivity - and these cables all go to the walls and surface on the other sides of workplaces via keystone jacks and wall outlet pieces. these outlets are then usable via computers and devices connecting ethernet cables to the wall, therefor a wall outlet for ethernet technically and merely connects a series of wires in a more clean way, to the IDF (intermediate distribution frame) where switches are located; however, direct wall-to-switch connections are not organized. instead, theyre messy and cluttered. thats where patch panels come in. patch panels are powerless (no power needed) electronic panels that work differently depending on their kind, but all do the same thing: they connect solid-core cables running through the walls to the male ports of the panel and allow for female ports on the other side to interconnect with the switch, meaning the solid core cables that didnt have to move are basically even more improved in their security. patch panels work in different methods: older models typically used a patched-in wire method were the RJ-45 connector had to be removed and each wire of a 4-pair UTP cable had to connect directly into the back of the panel. models have moved to better ways of connecting RJ-45 termination connectors directly to each other, leaving for less technical work to be done by technicians. patch cables can also be any kind of stranded-core UTP cabling to handle stress, but the premade cables are typically much more refurbished and stroger against pulls.
the last part of a computer to connect to a network is via the work area, where computers, telephones or printers are connected. in this stage, wall outlets with RJ-45 jacks are placed for somebody to use. most importantly, these wall outlets also have categories and they should match with the entire category of the network itself - else, this is all a wasted cause. imagine setting up a network, finely tuning cable walls and everything just to end everything with mismatching wall outlets. i'd call that an epic failure.
the following sections of the chapter follow on how networks work in multi-floor buildings. i started from page 195 of the book and ended the session at page 222. funny you should know, the chapter goes till page 285.. big challenge.

finish page: 222
finish time: N/A
study session 6 finishes here
