study session 9 starts here
start time: 1227
start page: 285

chapter 6 finally begins with the topic of TCP/IP. this chapter will discuss how a network works, and how you (yes aria, you, who installed two virtual machines just to set up a network) can set up your own network. it begins by going over the terminology and history of TCP/IP. first off, the definition of TCP/IP is nothing but a set of protocols, or a set of rules set out by different software in order to achieve proper inter-network or internet communication. during the 1980s, hardware being developed for networking was common, understandable and roughly fine, but software being developed was a headache. different companies like microsoft, apple, novell and UNIX (AT&T) all developed their own unique standards and protocols for networking - but the king, TCP/IP, from the UNIX world, survived. and yeah, it took them 20 years to finally settle on TCP/IP. crazy, right?
as mentioned before, the OSI model has 7 layers. the first 2 layers, physical and data link layers are responsible for the physical medium handling of the networks, whereas TCP/IP goes from layer 3, to the point of layer 7. so the OSI model looks something like this under a quick glance:
Layer 7 (Application)   --|
Layer 6 (Presentation)  __|
Layer 5 (Session)       __|--> TCP/IP stuff happen here. (software)
Layer 4 (Transport)     __|
Layer 3 (Network)       __|
Layer 2 (Data Link)             --|--> physical stuff happen here. (hardware)
Layer 1 (Physical)              --|
the TCP/IP protocol suite must first be learned from IP, internet protocol. IP is the primary protocol responsible for gathering information from layer 4 of the OSI model, or the transport layer, putting that information with important IP-related headers and sending that IP packet from layer 3 to layer 2, or the data link layer, for it to be encapsulated and sent through the wires as a frame. however, it is first important to understand how IP works. an IP address is a set of 4 different numbers from 0 to 255 which sometimes looks like something like this: "192.168.1.155". however, it is important to know that in the TCP/IP protocol suite world, this is not the only protocol available. this IP is called IPv4, or Internet Protocol version 4 as well. there is a newer version to IP - IPv6. besides IPv4 and IPv6, there is also the ICMP, internet control message protocol, which is mainly used for IP error output or program diagnostics. it rarely happens for someone to really need to use ICMP, but a very common exception is the ping program, used for pinging another IP address. ping works by asking "can this node running on the network under IP address xx.xx.xx.xx send its packets to xx.xx.xx.xx?"
as for the typical IPv4 packet, the internals have more than 14 pieces. this chapter, however, goes over some of the fundamentals and explains them even more thoroughly in the following chapters, such as chapter 12. the different pieces (note that im worried not to use the term "segments" because they belong to layer 4's data transmit medium and i dont wanna lose a point to the nerd chatGPT.) include:

VER     ##      IHL     ##      DSCP    ##      ECN     ##      Total Length    ##      TTL     ##      PROTOCOL        ##      ..
and of course, the simplified version of the packet in the previous chapters included the sender and receiver IP addresses. lets see how they are further complicated as we cover the chapter and the internals of the packet.

1. the VER section of the packet includes the version number for the packet itself. for IPv4 packets, the value for this beautiful placeholder is set as "4", where it is set as "6" for the more complex and humble IPv6. it is a way to tell the receiver of the protocol version used for the packet, if said short.
2. the Total Length section of the packet includes the, surprise surprise, total length of the payload and the header included. the maximum field length for this section is 16 bits represented in the octet, making the total packet length somewhere around 65KB (read, sixty five kilobytes.).
3. the TTL or time to live section includes the total lifetime of a packet. while it may seem weird, it is pretty intuitive, some packets might be flawed and software and hardware can also always be flawed. this section prevents a packet from indefinitely circling around in the internet, and its value is set from the typically default 128 to the maximum of 255. its value decrements with every time it passes from a router. after the packet reaches its TTL to 0, i believe NICs just drop it..? (like how they do with frames - if the ancient hub broadcasts every message on a network, then only the NIC responsible with its given MAC can actually read the frame, so i believe something like this also applies for the TTL.)
4. the PROTOCOL field defines what the packet holds or encapsulates. this is typically either UDP or TCP. now, it is important to know the distinctions between UDP and TCP. this is a matter of how packets are transmitted - for TCP, transmission control protocol, bits and bytes and packets all travel properly with less packet loss. this makes for a secure connection - a connection where both systems acknowledge they are ready to transmit data. as for UDP, user datagram protocol, data is just sent from the server to the client. there are no acknowledgements or anything like that. data is just sent. this is called a connectionless protcol, whereas TCP is a connection-oriented protocol. down below TCP and UDP are explained in a more comprehensive sense.
when choosing a protocol, from the TCP/IP suite, you are not the one choosing where a certain protocol applies to an application you use. developers decide - or even add up to certain protcols to make their own communications protocols based on their own standards. users dont use the protocols they desire - developers choose them and use them.
1. TCP: TCP is the most common among itself and UDP - hence the "TCP/IP" name. for a TCP connection to be made properly without risking data loss, the client and the server must both acknowledge their presence and readiness to transmit data. the certain rules added up unto TCP are called the TCP three-way handshake rules. this handshake is done in the three stages of SYN, SYN-ACK, and ACK. TCP is also responsible for chopping data up into segments and giving them sequence numbers (remember from before's notes? this is the reason for segments and their sequence numbers.) in order to make sure that each segment has been received properly, and to re-send a lost segment if needed.
a typical TCP segment looks like this:
SOURCE PORT     ##      DESTINATION PORT        ##      SEQUENCE NUMBER         ##      ACKNOWLEDGEMENT NUMBER
the source port defines which port, ranging from 1 to 65535 is responsible for sending the segment. this source port typically defines which application was responsible for sending data, and the destination port is also part of the same idea, whereas the destination port defines which application receives the TCP segment. for example, port 80 is used for HTTP (hypertext transfer protocol) whereas port 443 is used for HTTPS (hypertext transfer protocol secure). the sequence numbers and acknowledgement numbers are also sections responsible for verifying that the packets are traveling back and forth properly. there are also two more fields in the TCP segment: Flags and CHECKSUM. the flag field specifies (in bits) the state of the connection between two machines. the CHECKSUM field is used by the recipient to make sure the sent segments have been received properly or not. 
2. UDP: UDP, or user datagram protocol, is the fire and forget equivalent of TCP, which cuts off the three-way handshake entirely. UDP is used in two circumstances: when the data you want to send over is so large that few bytes off here and there wont ruin everything, or when the two devices you want to transfer data to and from are so close to each other that the chances of an issue is quite rare. the UDP diagram used for explaining its components is as follows:
SOURCE PORT     ##      DESTINATION PORT        ##      LENGTH          ##      CHECKSUM
the description for source and destination ports is the same as above. the length, as mentioned before, is a 16-bit octet-value field that describes the payload and header size over all, and the checksum field is just a test to make sure each segment has arrived over to the client in tact. for the datagram version of chopping up data in the TCP sense, it doesnt happen for UDP. UDP segments just get a header. (wait.. so this means a segment for UDP can be of any size? does that change the LENGTH field of a UDP segment?)
so far, we've gone over the simplistic idea of what the TCP/IP protocols suite offers, and thus far we have only covered 3 major branches of the suite including IPv4, IPv6, and ICMP. actually, i can proudly say i personally ran a program to view how my network worked from the insides (a virtual network running two alpine linux machines and, my host, of course) and i noticed the program use the argument icmp, and i wondered what it meant. i guess i know it now.
i kept this study session pretty short, because i have a really bad feeling that i have to read something multiple times to even understand it. we'll get to the rest of it soon, though! rest assured.

study session 9 ends here
finish page: 293
finish time: 1447


