mac addresses are a physical universally random number which are assigned in manufacturer companies by burning the number into a ROM located on the chips of the NICs themselves. however, in order for subnets to communicate with eachother, a suite of network protocols play a role in this (TCP/IP). TCP, also known as transmission control protocol and IP also known as internet protocol are both fundamental protocols designed for layer 3 - the network protocol. in this layer, packages called packets are made to go from one network to another. this is done by giving each device a logically unique identifier (in contrast to the physical identifier in mac) and sending packets using that identifier for lossless communication.
in layer 3, the "magic box" that connects subnets to one another is a router - a small device intended to make communication possible across networks. also, since communication is done via IP addresses instead of the typical MAC solution, network communication uses packets which means different frame kinds on local networks isnt an issue anymore, and any kind of device - wireless or wired, VoIP or ethernet, can communicate with eachother.
in an IP packet, the container contains the data, the sender and the receiver IP addresses. however, apparently a packet can contain more information (not shown in this chapter.) technically, for a packet to reach into the lower layer via cabling, it needs to be enclosed in a frame again, meaning the packet is enclosed in another canister which makes up a frame that makes its way to the cables, but the packet is still there - just enclosed in another "envelope". in order for a packet to reach its way somewhere else on a network as big as the internet, each packet needs to go through many more routers to reach its destination. to do this, every packet is encapsulated in a frame to be sent to another router via cables, the next router decapsulates the frame and gets the packet, and then re-capsulates the packet unto another frame, sending it over to another router.
in order for large data transmissions to actually happen, layer 4 also known as the transport layer is responsible for dividing packets into segments which are then received by the NIC to be re-assembled. this process is called segmentation and assembly - a computer has to divide bigger pieces of information into small segments of packets so that they can travel across multiple networks. since each frame contains nearly 1500 bytes and each packet gains a little overhead, overall the travelled info for one packet is very small - and most software these days are much larger than bytes, ranging from megabytes, gigabytes and even terabytes. for these transitions to even happen, a 10 megabyte piece of information is chopped into different packets with segments containing sequencing numbers in order for the receiver to know how many packets it should receive which can then be received on another end by the NIC to be re-assembled into the 10 megabyte package again.
in communications over the internet, there are two different methods of comms:
1. connection-oriented comms: both sides of the connection (the reciever or client and the server or the sender) both first make sure that they are present and ready to receive and send data, meaning the server asks the client for readiness and then sends over data. this type of communication is typically done via TCP - transmission control protocol.
2. connectionless comms: this is done without the server making sure the client is ready to access data or not, meaning there are no initial handshakes to make a secure, lossless connection. this is typically done via UDP - user diagram protocol.

1. destination port        2. source port       3. sequence number      4. acknowledgement number       5. data
if a typical segment from the transport layer (layer 4) is stripped off of its IP address, whats left is a TCP segment - containing a source port, destination port, a sequence number (because there are more than just 1 segment), an acknowledgement number, data and a bunch more. a destination port is a logical port ranging from 1 and 65536, and it is assigned to each process on an operating system; meaning each software or daemon is responsible for listening to segments on a specific port. a computer may simultaneously be receiving multiple segments - an email client may be running in the background while a piece of software is being downloaded. that destination IP makes sure the software listening to a specific port gets the segments it actually asks for. the source port is for back-to-back communications in case if the client needs to send back segments over to the server. sequence numbers are used to ensure the receival of every segment being sent over the network.
however, if lucky enough, a segment may contain UDP information - a lossy kind of communication which is reduced to only sending data from one end to another without making sure the client is actually receiving data. the diagram for a UDP segment is similar to the one of a TCP segment, but instead of sequence numbers or acknowledgement numbers or more checks, it is simply reduced to destination-source ports, length, checksum and the data itself.
for a network to ensure connections are made simultaneously, this job is done software-wise via the 5th layer, the session layer, where a system receives or sends checks to make sure that it is ready to receive or send information. this is solely the job of layer 5.
layer 6, also known as the presentation layer, is responsible for translating between the application layer to the transport layer or lower layers, or translating received information from a lower layer to the application layer. some protocols responsible for initiating at layer 5 may also end up working in layer 6, which may raise confusion.
layer 7 refers to the code which is responsible for making applications network-aware. for example, APIs - application programming interfaces are used in order to further increase or enhance an application's capabilities for communication over a network. APIs are basically sets of standard code responsible for doing so.
study session 2 finished
studied till page 100

