day 2
study session 3
starting at 0941
page 101
over the span of decades, computer network topologies have changed alot. from historic "ring" and "bus" topologies, to the nowadays more advanced hybrid and mesh. this chapter goes over the network topologies and the different kinds of caples and connection methods that were used for computers before.
a topology is a diagram - a method to show how a thing works, like a model but instead with easier to understand explanations. for example, the "bus" topology contains the idea that every computer in a local network can be connected via a single cable running on a straight line, while the ring topology contains the idea of a circular cable running across every computer in a circular pattern to form a network. however no cable is truly straight or circular. it's just how topologies work.
both bus and ring topologies interfered with eachother instead of working together, meaning porblems with these topologies were common. for example, a bus topology network would need "signal terminators" at each end of the cable to prevent a signal from one computer to reflect on itself, causing a network shutdown - or blow. in ring topologies, data flow was constant and there was no need for terminators, but computers faced the same issue on both topologies: data would flow freely in both topologies, which meant the network would kind of work like a hub rather than filtering data for the proper device correctly. if the bus topology didnt have terminators, a signal from one computer would reflect on another computer, and if the ring topology broke, the flow of data would simply stop.
a star topology would definitely challenge the disadvantages of a typical topology by enabling fault tolerance for itself by using a central box or a hub in the center of a network of computers, connecting the computers all to the hub with cables. as learned previously, a hub was just a signal repeater, repeating everything a computer sent on a network and that data (or frame) would travel across to every device on the network and be broadcasted to it, but no computer besides the one that had the message sent to it would be able to use it, meaning the frames would simply drop and be discarded.
since the advantages of a star topology were unignorable, networks wanted to be changed into a star but the price of having to redistribute every network was too much. thats when the hybrid topologies showed up - schemes of ring and bus topologies, redesigned with a central box interanally to behave like stars but still be the old ring or bus topologies. the design became different, but the topologies acted with the benefits of a star one, hence the name "hybrid" topologies.
however the benefit of topology itself in networking has earned its own 2 subcategories:
1. logical topology: the way electronic signals behave in cables of a network
2. physical topology: the way the network cables are arranged and how they look
any network that shares both topologies is called a hybrid, and the most successful one was the bus-star topology, with the ring-star topology eventually fading into the void of lost causes. the most successful ring-star topology was called the token star, manufactured by IBM.
for wireless networks, the topology used is the mesh topology, and it also has two subcategories:
1. partially meshed: a computer connection between another one remains redundant; however, not every computer needs to connect to all the others on the network, unlike the fully meshed topology.
2. fully meshed: every computer is connected wirelessly to every other computer on the network.
despite of the many different topologies and their information in detail, a topology doesnt really fully explain how a network actually communicates in and out of itself - a topology is just a diagram to show how those computers connect to eachother on a network. in order to make a practical topology, organizations and standards bodies have made networking technology - practical solutions to topologies and their other required hardware and software to make a computer send data to another on a network.
the cabling used to connect computers with eachother on a network is in two groups:
1. fiber optic
2. copper cables
        a. coaxial
        b. twisted pair
copper cables are also in two distinct subcategories as shown above, making for twisted pair and coaxial cables.
coaxial cables are thin copper wires surrounded by insulating material and in turn, that insulating material surrounded by a braided metal shield. the reason for the use of an insulating layer is simply to remove electromagnetic interferance also known as EMI - in an office, for example, where a network is to be hosted, things such as fridges, fans or other electronic devices generate electromagnetic forces, and if those forces reach inside a cable, may turn into wrong signals intended for the wrong place, destroying a network. the reason for the naming convention coaxial or "coax" is because the cable internals are in a straight axis with eachother - the copper wire, the insulating layer and the braid all are in one single line axis.
the coaxial cables used for networking nowadays are used mainly to connect a modem to an ISP. however, they are also used in satellite TVs, sattelite internet, and TV infrastructure. their main usages now are mostly these. but coaxial cables also differ in their resistance, mostly being manufactured in 75 ohm resistance. their connector types differ. while the older-day connectors were of a special bayonet-style connector named BNC connectors, while the typical satellite dish tv boxes require F-type connectors that screw on to secure a fixed transmit.
coax cables typically come with RG (radio guide) rating. this rating was invented by the US military to differenciate different coax cables from one another, and the initial coax cables used for cable modems were RG-59. the newer, more robust RG-6 cables took over. the RG rating, is as mentioned before, the resistance of the cable towards the flow of electricity measured in Ohm units, as both RG-59 and RG-6 cables are rated at the impedance of 75 Ohms. the coaxial cable impedance meter does not only show how much its inner copper resists electricity - rather, it can also be measured for how long it would take for a cable to make it to a full charge, and so on.
coaxial cables also can be separated into multi-streams due to their popularity with home services, ranging from TV boxes, cable modems, and so on, so forth. these separators separate one input into two output streams, and if a cable needs to be extended in length, barrel connectors are used.
as mentioned so far, the coaxials use two different connectors - the ancient bayonet-style secured BNC connector, and the newer F-type connector used as a screw-in solution to prevent data loss. another type of coaxial is the twinaxial cable - a double-wired copper conductor wrapped in a single shield, used mostly as a substitute for short fiber-cable distances like the switches within a rack. this kind of cabling method is cheaper and is called DAC - direct attached cable.
from coaxials have merged the newer, more advanced cables called the twisted pair. twisted pair cables come with pairs of twisted cables which range in different matters of protection, from foil to braided metal shielding. the reason for twisting is to reduce a beneficiary downset of networking called "crosstalk" not yet mentioned so far in the chapter. the more twists per foot, the less the crosstalk. twisted pair cables typically come in 6 different kinds of protection methods, naming them all would take long. the main difference in shielded and unshielded twisted pairs is in whether the cables have any protection against EMI and how much they cost. UTP cables just come in their plastic skin, cost less and can perform as well as shielded twisties. the typical connector used for older telephone models used a registered jack (RJ) connector with 4 twisted pairs, and that makes common mistakes between the 8P8C connectors intended for networking. the 8P8C connector is formally known as the RJ-45 connector.
twisted pairs can also share speeds in terms of hertz - presenting how many bits can travel across a cable. a megahertz, or shown typically as Mhz, is a million bits. cables and their speeds range from 16Mhz depending on the category of the cable to 2000Mhz. categories are from cat 3 until cat 8 with variations in some other categories as well, such as cat 7, which also includes a cat 7a with more speed, meaning with a little bit of twisting and tweaking, a category can result in more bits traveled in a second.
fiber optics is an entirely separate discussion and takes the now traditional ethernet twisted pair cable and casually removes the copper conductor in the middle and replaces it with a glass fiber, puts a cladder around it which has the duty of reflecting the light emitted by the fiber, and a signal amplifier goes around the cladder and finally the plastic jacket around all of this marvelous technology protects it against surrounding environmental disadvantages. the idea of EMI is completely dismissed for fiber optic because electromagnetic waves or even electric pulses are not responsible for carrying bits - instead, light does the job. there are also ranges of fiber optic cable sizes which are all for different jobs, but most importantly, the way light is emitted for data is important here. light can either be emitted from LEDs (light emitting diodes (tell me you knew that acronym and ill call you a nerd)) and from lasers. the light fibers in a fiber optic cable are responsible for sending and receiving data - however, there's typically only one fiber line; despite that, sender and receiver fibers are different but are rather duplex in a fiber viewed as one. there are hundreds of different connectors used for fiber optic cables, but the 4 important ones are ST, LC, MT-RJ, and SC. (no idea what any of those mean, dont wanna bother with it eiher.)
since network cables work by transmitting bits - the fastest counting system available - to transmit data really quickly (as mentioned, a 10Mhz ethernet cable is responsible for sending data over at speeds of 10 million bits a second), they generate heat over time, which may cause fire hazards. this results in cable fire ratings - PVC, plenum and riser. the main fire hazard in network cables is not the fire they produce because theyre typically not flammable - the main issue is the fumes and gas which they produce. fire ratings in cables try their best to prevent that alone - while PVC doesnt prevent anything at all, plenum has more safety against said fumes. riser is also intended for specific building architectures and network layouts.
study session 3 finished
chapter 2 finished
page 135


