study session 12 starts here
start time: 1203
start page: 338

as discussed in the previous study sessions, we learned how networks work with the TCP/IP protocols assigned to their logical and physical topologies. we learned how using IP addressing is much more flexible compared to MAC addressing, and IP addressing is genuinely the better option for larger networks which scale up to the internet itself, which had nearly half a billion devices 10 years ago. who knows how many devices it has now? if it wasnt for TCP/IP, the world of networking would have been limited to simple LANs working with NICs to get info passed around. after learning how subnetting is done, we now learn how we can change TCP/IP settings on a machine (default gateway, subnet mask, IP address, and so on) ourselves. this is primarily entirely done in 2 main ways: static addressing and dynamic addressing. lets compare the two.
1. static addressing (static assignment used in the Network+ exam): this method is used when dealing with information yourself - you calculate and manage your own default gateway, your router, your IP, and you make your own network with the information you want to be used. this is mostly done in configuration scenarios.
2. dynamic addressing (dynamic assignment used in the Network+ exam): this is done by letting the software you have installed on your operating system and also by the firmware installed on the networking hardware configure everything itself. newer software which are based on the TCP/IP protocols mostly come with this option, like DHCP.
how you do your networking configuration manually is really never set out by textbook rules. instead, there are certain rules you should follow because typically they are the most common things done when manually setting up a network. you should make your default gateway take the last or first host ID on the network, try to keep the host IDs sequential, and of course, always document everything you do for the next person to come after you. the rest of the chapter delves deep into the topic of how networking is done in different operating systems. while macOS and Microsoft Windows operating systems all share UI screens for editing information, you can use the geekminal (terminal) on linux-based operating systems with the help of the ip command to assign IP addresses based on the device you want to alter. you may want to change IP address on a device with the label eno1, and it is done like so: ip addr add x.x.x.x dev eno1 where you specify the specific device on your system and the actual address you want to assign to that device. another deprecated option is the ifconfig command, but nobody really uses it anymore. other distros also invite GUIs but still, the terminal is much better in my opinion. it is also important to note that commands run by ip addr to alter addresses are not permanent modifications - instead, you may need to find the configuration files regarding your network configurations and edit them from there.
typically, editing networks via the commandline or making configuration changes manually is difficult. having to assign each host its IP address and other information like its subnet mask, gateway and other stuff is painful and takes a lot of time. thats where dynamic assignment comes in hand with the DHCP - dynamic host configuration protocol - comes to play. it comes in two places - the client and the server. the client is responsible with getting the address from the dhcp server, and the dhcp server is responsible for giving the client its IP address and other information to use. the way it works is quite simple, and its done in a four-way handshake or the DHCP DORA - the dhcp discover, offer, request, acknowledge. the whole process is done in a "lease" process - the client sends out a dhcp discover request to see if there are any dhcp servers available, the dhcp server then offers the client a set of information like a default gateway, an IP address, and a subnet mask, and then the client requests for the given information, and the acknowledgement step is where both the client and the server sync in with the exchanged information. the information is leased to the client and the process is done again in a matter of 1-8 days, and the server lease pool is where the server gets its information from. its a more automated, better and more sane solution to the static addressing method.

finish page: 349
finish time: 1605
study session 12 finishes here
