study session 13 starts here
start page: 351
start time: 1410

as mentioned before in the study notes, DHCP or dynamic host configuration protocol is a method for configuring networks in a much better sense. we talked about how it works via the four-step DORA (discover, offer, request, acknowledge) and how it works over all, and now the book is talking about how a DHCP server works. for a DHCP client to work, typically the needed configurations are minimal unless you cook operating systems and wear mage clothes, but configuring a DHCP server is different. for a DHCP server to work, it needs to have access to a pool of legitimate IP addresses to pass down unto the hosts, it needs to know a network's default gateway and its subnet mask. typically, a DHCP server uses a domain scope (or range) from a certain number in network IDs like 192.168.122.5 to 192.168.122.254 to pass out IP addresses for each node. the DHCP server is also responsible for giving the network additional information to use such as a time clock server, a DNS server, and a lot of more other information. in most cases where only a single LAN or two LANs are available on an entire network, it is practical to use maybe two DHCP servers to make them get IP addresses. in a scenario where there are a lot of LANs under one network, it is almost stupid to make every LAN a DHCP server. in these scenarios, a DHCP relay is used where it works as follows:
1. when a lease offer done by a DHCP server expires for the client, its IP address also expires and the DHCP broadcast message is no longer possible due to IP address loss. now the host on the network only has a MAC address - no IP address, and it is unrecognizable besides its MAC address - and that's how the DORA happens. with MACs. however, problem is that modern routers mostly disable the primitive broadcast to even make the internet work.
2. a router is pre-configured to allow only and only DHCP broadcasts (maybe ARP too, sometimes only when ARP users dont get naughty) and the host with no IP address is now capable of sending broadcast messages across one LAN to one DHCP server in order to lease another IP address to communicate with TCP/IP functions. woohoo! everyone has an IP address now.
while a lot of nodes on a network may need dynamic addressing to work, some devices generally dont need dynamic addressing and need static addressing such as cameras, printers or switches and routers. these devices need to have recognizable IPs which dont change ever, because configuring them would be a headache if they constantly changed. the method of keeping a range of IP addresses available for static addressing is called reservation, where based on node/switch/router settings are configured. some go for MAC reservation in DHCP configuration settings, assigning a MAC address of one node one IP address every time a lease happens - some go for the range edit and make a range smaller to keep a certain number of nodes with the statically assigned IP addresses they carved out of the network. choosing how to do this is up to you, network padawman!
when working with DHCP, it is important to know that a DHCP server might sometimes not be reachable via a host on a network and a problem may occur. it is good to know how DHCP issues are resolved, as they follow a certain diagram of troubleshooting. first, most operating systems show errors regarding the network connection. if your operating system interface warns you that connection to a DHCP server cannot be established, there are other signs to see that in action. your network may be assigned a range of APIPA special addresses in order to prevent a total network catastrophe, where each node is given the range of 169.254.0.0 to 169.254.255.255, which allows for a lot of nodes on one network. if you see your IP range from 169.254.0.0 to anything else, DHCP may not be working properly. to fix this, there are many ways. the most common way is to renew a lease from the DHCP server via either ifconfig in MAC, ipconfig in windows and dhclient on linux. another point of strength is to sometimes use multiple DHCP servers over one network (done in enterprise environments) where it would cost a lot for a network to just go down. this is called a DHCP failover, where chances of an entire network becoming unable to communicate with the internet goes down significantly due to backup plans for something to go wrong. typically on a network there may also be chances where, say, a network ID assigned is 10.12.34.0/24 and suddenly someone's host ID on the network is 173.67.43.55, and this happens because of rogue DHCP servers. this causes networks to malfunction and happens in two scenarios: when a person connects a router which is preconfigured to use its own DHCP server by default into the wall outlet of a network, and when a malicious attack is being done against the network. detecting this is either really easy or really hard - if the IP address assigned to the host of a network is typically not in the range or scope of leases, that makes room for additional unknown DHCP servers. if the malicious attacker also uses the DHCP range needed for the network to work, good luck finding the bad guy.
there are also some IP address ranges hidden from the internet, going from the range 10.0.0.0, 192.168.0.0, 127.0.0.1 (used entirely for loopback by the way) and 172.16.0.0, and APIPA if you wanna include the windows protocol of letting networks still work despite catastrophes. these ranges hide nodes from the internet but stop them from even communicating with outsider networks.

chapter 6 ends here (after two weeks and 80 pages.. phew)
finish page: 369
finish time: 1501
study session 13 ends here
