study session 19 starts here
start page: 412
start time: 2015

as earlier mentioned, we talked about the distance vector and path vector routing protocols which were made to ensure proper routing within networks. in this study session, we'll talk about the link state routing protocols. one of the most common dynamic routing protocols used today is OSPF (open shortest path first). this protcol has had its latest version, version 2 available for IPv4 and version 3 has had updates for IPv6. OSPF works by first sending a Hello packet to the other routers available, and once routers are aware of the Hello packets, they send each other LSA (link state advertisement) packets. these packets contain routing tables used in order to gain awareness of possible packet routes. the main metric contributor to this protocol is cost, which is related to network bandwidth - hops are not counted anymore. if a fiber-based network with 4 hops is available and is assigned as a faster class than a 1GBASE-T network with only 1 hop, it automatically sends over the packets over the less costy route with 4 hops. OSPF also re-constructs faster routes by sending convergence LSA packets in order to regain routing tables in case if the available routers go down, and entirely prevents loops where packets must travel across the globe, in a loop fashion. OSPF-Based routing uses areas as a method to form a backbone area to make sure all packets go through the most optimal route possible. this makes the routing go as big as global-scale, and autonomous systems use OSPF for their internal networking, or IGP. another protocol commonly used in ISPs is IS-IS (intermediate system to intermediate system). it was developed at roughly the same time around when OSPF was developed, and its the only option to use besides OSPF. the only advantage that IS-IS had was that it was available with IPv6 from the start. another protocol which was made before OSPF to solve the routing problems of RIP was IGRP, by Cisco, to solve the issues of RIP. the newer version of this proprietary protcol was renamed EIGRP (enhanced internal gateway routing protocol). Cisco itself represents this protocol to be in the distance vector category, while others place it as a hybrid protocol. it is defined as an advanced distance vector protocol.
routers are also capable of communicating simultaneously with different routers via different protocols. this means that information laid out from one protocol might be translated into another protocol to be used in order to form routing tables. this makes for multilingual routing and prevents the many routing protocols to take over the general idea of how routing might become impossible due to the many protocols out there. there is also decisions made by routers which determines, based on the different routes and protocols, which metric is the most desirable, called router preference.
to connect to a router, however, you will need a rollover or Yost serial cable. the name is complicated, but its just a simple serial cable typically made by Cisco which consists of one 8P8C connector on one end and another VGA-like connector on another end. routers and switches have similar configuration interfaces, hence the label "managed devices" put unto them. this means these devices are confiugurable to do a certain task you want them to do. to configure a Cisco router, you may need to learn about cisco IOS - the operating system used for running routers and other cisco equipment. typically though, through PuTTY you can configure a serial interface easily and automatically boot up the router operating and watch it happen (i'll be sure to learn a LOT about IOS!) though typically, you might come across already-configured routers which can be re-configured via web access. web access requires information regarding the IP address of the router itself, and it's crucial to know it to properly connect to the web interface. typically its best to give your host running the web browser a static IP address in the same subnet mask of the router (if the router is assigned the IP address 192.168.1.1, give your host the address 192.168.1.2) and once you know how to connect to the web interface via the router's IP address and the instructions, you'll be good to go. also, remember to never connect a non-configured router to an already configured network - you might ruin the network and make a rogue DHCP server appear from nowhere.

finish page: 425
finish time: 2049
study session 19 finishes here
