study session 18 starts here
start page: 400
start time: 1534

in the previous study note, we talked about the different routing protocols used in routers. we mentioned the 3 "distance vector", "link state" and "hybrid" protocol categories, but we didnt really talk about the protocols, did we? lets start from the first protocols that appeared in routing - distance vector. distance vector based protocols use the number of hops for a packet to reach a desired network as the metric - if a packet has to go through 4 routers, the metric is assigned as 4. if the packet needs to go through 1 hop, the metric is assigned as 1. however, a problem rises - what if latency, bandwidth, cost and delay play roles in the metric 1 route, and a metric 5 route becomes faster than that one? well, the metric 1 route is re-defined as a metric 10 route. as the route becomes slower, the metric gets an additional zero assigned to it at the value. this way, a metric 5 route is assigned as the priority, or the desired route. in the distance vector protocols, when we connect multiple networks together via routers, the routers learn the routes to different networks based on whether they have dynamic routing or not. the dynamic routing shines here - if a router in between 3-4 routers to transfer a packet to another network doesnt know the IP address to the further distances, it just uses dynamic routing to learn all of the paths it needs to take. this way, further static route assignment hassles are totally missed and dynamic routing takes the win. it takes multiple steps for multiple routers to learn routing tables from each other, though - a very big problem which rises for bigger internetworks which use more than 10 routers. for 4 or 5 routers, it's totally fine to use distance vector protocols - it works fine, though it might take around a minute for every router on the network to learn about the state of every router. every router has to share its routing tables with the other routers back and forth to the point where every router now knows how to take one packet to its desired destination while keeping an eye out for metrics. once the lowest metric value is found and selected as the primary route, it is used. if a router breaks mid-transfer and the network fails, the routers take a few minutes to re-learn their routes and to prioritize the new higher-but not highest-metric route and use that from then on. though again, it seems like routing with distance vector looks like the broadcasts of MAC addresses on a LAN. once the network grows, theres no room for broadcasts - and just like that, distance vector also becomes useless because it starts flooding routers with routing information all the time. the first protocol for distance vector routing was RIPv1 (routing information protocol version 1). theres also path vector routing protocol BGP. lets dive into RIP and see how it changed through the two versions of itself.
1. RIPv1 (routing information protocol version 1): this was the first version of distance vector routing protocols, as deemed to be the first proper routing protocol introduced in networking. though the predecessors date back to the times of the beginning of the internet itself, RIPv1 was, with all of its flaws, the first protocol to make it all happen. it went from no encryption, route update times of 30 seconds, hop max cout of 15 to its successor, the RIPv2 protocol. did the RIPv2 protocol make changes? hell yeah it did.
2. RIPv2 (routing information protocol version 2): this is the successor of RIPv1. RIPv2 introduced encryption for routing and maximized the number of hops allowed between networks at 30, and also set time intervals for routing table updates from 30 to 90 seconds. big win, but it was still very, very slow for its job. its still used in modern home routers to this day because its cheap and easy to implement - but not the primary.
beyond RIP turned out the better version of routing, path vector routing, or BGP. BGP is essentially the idea of separating the small routers from bigger backbone-layer routers which operate at higher routing levels and are responsible for data that travels across more than 30 routers - cases where data has to go from one country to another side of the world. in these scenarios, typical routing protocols like RIP would be deemed entirely useless and instead, we have BGP - autonomous systems and machines laid out across the globe to form multiple points of communications to replace, say, 30 hops, with a little less hops and definitely faster routing.

finish page: 411
finish time: 1617
study session 18 finishes here
