study session 7 starts here
start page: 223
start time: 1024

as mentioned before in study session 5, chapter 5 describes how a physical network is laid out in a single floor of a building. however, it did not discuss how networks are laid out in an entire building. so far, we mentioned how solid core cables run through walls and roofs, but we didn't talk about how cabling runs through an entire building. we discussed the intermediate distribution frame (IDF) or the "telecommunications room" of a single floor, but didnt really discuss the MDF (main distribution frame).
the standards that followed the cabling laws of a single floor, or the structured cabling standards, expand critical standards from a single floor, to multiple floors of a building, to an entire building, to interconnecting multiple buildings in an area to form a WAN (wide area network).
when a network is made in a multi-floor building, as described in the previous chapter, a single backbone switch is used to operate the multiple switches which connect to it in order to form a hierarchy of networking for easier diagnosis and better configurations. however, it is important to know how this "backbone switch" operates from now on. when a multi-floor network forms, the ISP's responsibility on one end is to provide services for the network, and on the other side, or the demarcation point (demarc), the network nerds are responsible with handling everything. to think of it simply, this is a responsibility division between who should diagnose what issue at a time of network crisis. what ISPs offer for networks is NIUs - or network interface units - which lets them diagnose networks and find whether an issue belongs to one side of the demarc or not. this helps further boost the process of network troubleshooting regarding whether the network provider really provides a smartjack or just a basic demarc point. demarc points are basically like this: "hello network demon, we circuited a network box to the point of your house with telephone cabling inside it. now you should wire the box from the box to your building, and the rest is up to you. we're not responsible for anything from this point onwards". this demarc point either comes in a smartjack - an intelligent deivce that enables networkers to diagnose it properly with its amazing sensors and allow them to loop back into the demarc point easily - or they can just be simple dumb wire boxes. the demarc is typically located in the service related entry point of a network. once the demarc is placed, the demarc extensions (cables running through the building) find their way in a central network area where the customer-premises equipment (CPE) is located. the demarc extensions typically run through demarc extensions to find their way to a patch panel for further refining of the demarc and the CPE. whether these cables connect to the backbone switch or something else remains as what purpose that network tends to serve. i believe the patch cables then connect to a switch and then the switch connects itself to other switches forming the typical network hierarchy. (this is all just a guess, though. hit me!)
as i had thought, the place where all the NIUs, the CPE and the backbone switch and the cross-connect patch panels are located is in the MDF - the main distribution frame. later on, with proper cabling and everything, the MDF interconnects to the IDFs available on each building. how this is laid out is, of course, regarding the purpose of the building. one building might have one MDF, multiple IDFs and multiple computers connected to each IDF, while one network might have one IDF, and one MDF both serving as the MDF. this all circles back to how a distribution frame is formed around the entire network itself. 
how a network is laid out as structured cabling plans arise becomes a very big problem. a structured cabling installer might be aware of how a building is laid out - but the cabling limitations and how the network is laid out, is typically a very needy process. as mentioned before, the typical range between a telecoms room and the wall outlet cant be anything more than 90 meters (though i wonder, if 10 gigabit-large repeaters are placed under the sea canals of the internet's backbone, are there repeaters available for copper cabling?) and every TIA/EIA rule has to be paid attention to for a properly functioning network. a proper structured cabling solution cannot work without a floor plan - if a network installer doesnt ask for a floor plan, just tell that installer to resign from his or her job.
installing a network is very cost-inefficient and making a mistake by not installing a drop then is gonna land you in even more network debt. each cable that finds its way to the work area via wall outlets and jacks and wall plates is called a drop. most network installers work by per-drop value, meaning they charge for each drop they install. besides the typical through-the-wall solutions of installing networking cables, another common solution for older buildings, smaller networks or even in situations where walls shouldnt be dug through, is the raceway network installation. it is much more cost effective, easier to install but a little less neat solution to having to install cables through the walls. i bet some walls shouldnt be broken - especially the 5th wall. when installing a network, another important issue, the telecommunications room location - comes to mind. the telecommunications room must have a mere 90 meter distance between its nodes, must directly have low air humidity and vents to let air in and out, must be secure, and so on. deciding how the telecoms room works and where it is placed is a very crucial step to laying out networks. though never lay out a network in the toilet, because apparently meyers did that and an entire network blew up for him once. telecoms rooms must be placed in the right places. 
and of course, the most demanding yet the most disliked job in networking, running cables through vertical and horizontal walls, arises as the main problem to networking. how cables are laid out in a building definitely changes how the network behaves. installing cables horizontally might be easier compared to the nightmarish duty of running verticals through rooftiles just to secure cables via cable trays and securing them and organizing them so they dont splash out as a bunch of cables in the middle of a roof. diagnosing cables in roofs is definitely a big duty.. and it comes with greater rewards. then comes installing cables through outlets - done typically by cutting through the drop area and aligning the position of the faceplate by using a placeholder in the hole. of course, the job of running cables is definitely the least parised even here in my notes, but still, godpseed, network installers!
another important step in installing cabling properly is definitely laying out wall outlets and drops properly by typically connecting run cable wires to the proper ends of a crimp, by crimping or whatever. this goes into consideration because im sure newer wall outlet jacks wont require the hefty work of crimping each solid core wire to its coresponding color match. the cable running part is definitely something id never even look at while its happeneing.. god forbid. theres also the problems of patch panels, cable managements in patch panels and so on. installing a network consumes more time than i had thought.. its really one hell of an issue for itself. i guess the reward of sending cat photos to your co-worker in the same room with the network is worth it.

finish page: N/A
finish time: 1146
study session 7 finishes here
