study session 17 starts here
start page: 395
start time: 1624

as previously mentioned, we talked about how NATs and PATs work, and how routers disguise private or sometimes confidential IP addresses using both technologies, where port forwarding is also used in order for outsiders to access content this way. both port forwarding and NAT/PAT are very, very amazing hacks used in order to extend IPv4 shell life, and from this hack, from decades ago, the limited IPv4 has survived up to this day, even though not as strong and public as before, but still very usable. most routers nowadays have NAT pre-enabled for defualt protection - however, configuring it and disabling/enabling it is simple, done via router settings. typically, NAT settings can be changed via router operation mode sections with the two options of "gateway" and "router". acting as a gateway is the "linksys" speak for specifying NAT is enabled, and vice versa. this is to home routers and lesser-enterprise models - more technical models offer much more settings to configure for NAT, PAT and port forwarding.
while it seems like routing tables are typically offered statically to the routers, newer router models also come with abilities to use dynamic routers - routers talk to each other and update each other dynamically based on what they want from different hops (each time a packet is passed across a network is called a hop) and they can understand information regarding the different routing tables for different networks from two or more hops away, hence dynamic routing. the routing protocols mentioned in the Network+ exam are 3: distance vector, link state, hybrid. as mentioned before, routing metrics are numbers based on the preferabilities of different routes to same networks. these metrics are all differently measured based on the different routing protocols distance vector, link state and hybrid - the numbers always vary, and the less the number for metrics, the more usable a route is compared to the other available routes. when dynamic routing combines with routing metrics, networks honestly seem to become almost inevitable - and almost unbreakable. once enough dynamic routing protocols are implemented, designed and perfected and once more and more routes are added to a list of routes, there's always the fixed room for failure and it is perfectly managed, and if you pay close attention, you'll notice that almost every stage of networking based on the OSI model is implemented to have a "failsafe mechanism". layer 1 used the mathematical frame check (FCS) to check if a frame is properly received, NICs are designed to receive packets based on the two protocols of TCP and UDP where each is designed with a design method in mind whereas TCP checks for data loss and UDP doesnt, and in the network layer it seems like this is the check - routing is done so perfectly to make sure failure is as minimal as possible.
as for the metrics value, there are 4 fundamental causes to metric differences:
1. hop count: if a packet is made to do multiple subsequent router changes in order to get to its recipient, it is called a hop count. for example, a packet has to travel to 4 subsequent routers in order to make it to the desired router. the hop count in this condition is 4, and it affects the routing metric.
2. bandwidth: the bandwidth of the different routers installed on different networks varies heavily. a 10BASE-T network might offer around a 10 megabit speed while a 40GBASE-T network router can easily handle around 40 gigabits per second - the different network speeds based on different network technologies also affects overall routing metric.
3. delay: the collective issue of networking delay also plays a fundamental role in routing metrics. once the delay for a packet to get to point A from point B increases, routing metrics for that route increase as well, causing a fundamental routing metric number increase. the different factors which play roles in contribution to delay range from things as inevitable as crosstalk to physical point distance, but the overall contributors vary in range of how commonly avoided and inevitable they are.
4. cost: as the bandwidth to send media over cables decreases, this causes the cost factor for a route to skyrocket. once properly installed cabling is no longer offered in routing environments, the cost of a route can change a lot, and the cost factor can also be edited by network administrators to prevent a route from becoming primary.

finish page: 400 (happy 400th page!)
finish time: 1656
study session 17 finishes here
