study session 1 starts here
start time 1653
start page 1

OSI is an acronym that stands for "Open Systems Interconnection". it consists of seven layers. Different models such as the OSI model are used to simplify the networking process understanding. models in terminology are used to describe ways to represent a real thing, but with less detail to prevent confusion. the international organization for standardization made the seven-layer OSI model, and ISO comes from the greek word "isos" which means equal.
protocols are defined laws and rules for hardware and software which enable proper intercomms.
the OSI model seven layers consist of:
7. application  > away
6. presentation > pizza
5. session      > sausage
4. transport    > throw
3. network      > not
2. data link    > do
1. physical     > please
the networking model encourages each layer to not interwine with another as much as possible; meaning each layer is supposed to do what it should do, without going into another layer, meaning each layer has to do a separate job.
Layers 1 and 2 are responsible for physical data transfer, and in an imaginary situation of a company with multiple computers that are connected to form a network, the typical interconnection method is done with UTP cabling. UTP is an acronym for "Unshielded Twisted Pair". UTP cables contain four pairs of wires which are responsible for sending and receiving data. besides the cabling, there are "central boxes" which are responsible for the flow of data from one computer to another. each system of a network has a cable run through the central box. so technically so far, layer 1 consists of the UTP cabling and the central box which are responsible for the physical transmit of data.
layer 2 is responsible for data link - using network interface cards for a computer to connect a computer from an ethernet port to a UTP cable from layer 1, and then to connect that UTP cable into a hub, or a "central box". the NIC (or network interface card) is responsible for generating a MAC (media access control) address; a unique identifier responsible for allowing each network to have a unique identifier for itsef in order to prevent data to reach the wrong system. a mac address is 48 bits in hexadecimal (each value in hex is 4 bits) and the first 6 digits of a mac address is an OUI - organizationally unique identifier which is unique for each NIC manufacturer. the rest of the digits is the device ID. note that for a manufacturer to even be able to produce NICs they need to get universally unique mac addresses from the IEEE.
in order for a computer to send data via the NIC it has to encapsulate data in wrappers and turn them into chunks of data for the data to be received by the right computer. this idea is called encapsulation - and for an imaginary electricity pulse method of data transmit, you can think of electric pulses as 1s and 0s where each digit represents a binary situation - these binaries are all wrapped in a chunk to be transmitted correctly on the network. encapsulation creates data frames, and these frames are both received and sent and read by the NIC.
new thing learned: a computer might have two NICs - one for physical transmit (ethernet) and one for wireless transmit (wlan). each might have their own addresses, and might even have software-written mac addresses done by something like networkmanager to give more security to the computer.
a NIC sends these frames (data frames which are sent via encapsulation) to another NIC and each frame consists of 5 sections:
1. Receiver MAC address         2. Sender MAC address           3. Type         4. Data         5. FCS
the receiver mac address is used to determine which NIC receives the frame, the sender mac address represents the NIC which sends the frame to the receiver, the type is used to declare what kind of data is encapsulated in the frame, data is the encapsulated data itself, and FCS - frame check sequence, uses a cyclic redundancy check that the receiving NIC uses to ensure the data arrived intact.
after sending a frame via the ethernet cable (example) the cable transmits the frame to the central box. the central box then sends the data to the corresponding MAC address for the receiver. however, the terminology of the central box has changed alot since the past. before, the central box was called a hub which basically sent the received frames to every connected computer on the network, but the NICs that were not the receivers would just drop the data. nowadays the hub is replaced by the switch, which filters traffic by mac address, so instead of sending frames to each connected computer on the network, it would simply send data to only the receiver.
if a NIC doesnt know the receiver's mac address, it broadcasts a message on the network for every device to send their mac address in order to learn the needed receiver mac address for frame transmission. however this is also done by picking up an IP address from the network to select a target from the crowd.
since the data link layer works with mac addresses, a correction would be to put the "central box" (now defined as either hubs or switches) on to layer 2, because it works with mac addresses. cabling is regarded as layer 1 (physical). NICs are considered to be layer 1 and 2. NICs are also not only capable of sending and receiving frames - their jobs are separated into two sublayers: Logical Link Control and Media Access Control. logical link control is responsible for communicating from the NIC with the operating sytem via device drivers, and media access control is responsible for creating, sending and receiving frames.
as the internet keeps becoming larger and larger, the idea of using mac addresses to send and receive data on the internet becomes less promising - the idea of broadcasting a message for every computer to listen to in order to get their mac address would fill up speech, meaning no computer could talk anymore. instead of relying on macs alone, networks are chopped into sublayers: subnets, each following the network protocol, its rules and how data is sent and received over subnets in order to make vast communication more possible. the data that is moved between subnets is called a packet - and network protocols (available on every operating system) must know how to create a unique identifier for each device and how to work with packets, how to chop into different segments and how to get them over to different devices on each subnet.

finish page: 72
finish time: 1800
study session 1 finishes here
