study session 16 starts here
start page: 386
start time: 1404

across this chapter, we have learned that routers are capable of allowing routing across different ethernet networks. ethernet is mainly used in local connections where you could connect different switches, hubs and routers via ethernet cables - but not all connections are ethernet. some connections vary. some of them are cable modems, which use coaxial cables. some of them are fiber-based, which use specific fiber-based communication methods to stretch out length. the only common thing different network technologies share is that once a network taps into layer 3, packets are used and layer 2 stuff are ditched. a frame is no longer a frame - it loses encapsulation via router dissection and turns into a packet. a router is not only capable of removing layer-2 information from a frame, it is even capable of allowing different interface modules to interconnect different LANs together. in a real world scenario, the interface for a typical network might be a network interface card for ethernet. you could add an LTE (mobile internet) interface to a switch to let it connect via different technologies as well.
a common issue as stated earlier through the book when discussing IPv4 was the fact that before subnetting was introduced as a concept to secure numbers of IP addresses used on one network, IPv4 addresses were already on the verge of running out. while one solution to battle this issue was to enable subnetting to let companies use less IP addresses and waste less of them, a common hack regarding routing technology nowadays is to enable devices with probably not public addresses to act as if they are using a public address by an address translation done in the layer 3 of the network, or the routing layer. there are mainly two types of translations: NAT and PAT. routers which come integrated with these technologies (most of them do, nowadays) are capable of translating a host on the network's IP address into a public address honed by the router itself. if a router has its own dedicated IP address, then that router can act as a mask for the, say, private or public address which belongs to a local network to either protect the network's privacy, or to enable use of IPv4 with even less IP addresses wasted on a network. NAT works by manipulating the source IP address and changing it into something else, while PAT takes care of the source port of the packet being sent. packets all come from different applications, and documentation regarding port numbers makes it so that guessing if a packet is going to a webserver is easy to do. therefore, the router can be capable of translation of the port number from what it was to a totally random number between 1 and 65535.
besides NAT and PAT which offer hacks and solutions for the IPv4 shortage problem, theres also sNAT and dNAT, sNAT being static NAT where one IP address from the router is assigned to the different hosts on a network. more interestingly, dNAT allows for a dynamic solution of using multiple IP addresses from a pool or a reserve to assist each host dynamically. if the router is assigned with 10 addresses and tasked with dynamic network address translation, it can assign different addresses to 40 hosts simultaenously. one issue which rises with NAT and PAT is that you could only send packets over with a different IP address than your own host's. if somebody wants to access, say, a webserver being run on your system, they wouldn't know what IP address to use to access your content. this is where port forwarding comes in - it allows for hosting a specific piece of software running on a specific port to be accessed from the outside. port forwarding is configured from the router settings, and it is definitely one of the coolest things a router can do.

finish page: 394
finish time: 1700
study session 16 finishes here
