study session 15 starts here
start time: 1738
start page: 378

to recall properly what we learned from the last session, we briefly covered how the routing table is used to route traffic across different LANs or WANs via the many cool stuff in the routing table such as the Destination Network ID, the genmask, the flags, and so on. in the following notes, lets learn even more cool stuff about routing. there are a few more content regarding a routing tables which i dont want to open up to, but generally a router's routing table follows a generic system. first, the router must check whether the destination address that the router is sending packets to is comparable and gives a positive value to any routing scheme defined in the table. if there are multiple routing schemes enlisted for the router, the router's responsible for sending the packet through the fastest and most optimal route, discussed later on. (if the route isnt defined in the routing table, it needs to be either statically or dynamically added, but just know that for now!) the router dissects the layer 2 content from a packet, looks at its destination address, looks for the optimal destination address to send the packet over, and based on the instructions of the routing table, sends the packet via ARP requests. as mentioned in the previous chapters, ARP requests and responses are a method to gain nodes' MAC addresses so that the router can directly send the packets to the switch by knowing the switch and the node's MAC addresses. another thing that is important to know is that any device which uses software and hardware capable of the TCP/IP protocol suite is capable of using routing tables. nodes on a network use routing tables built into them; however, routers are more complex hardware which are also capable of communicating with other routers (this is how dynamic routing is formed, and also what one of the 4 types of packet communication is used for. multicast - if you reckon, is a packet transmit method used for router communication.).
typically, there are "default" destinations in a routing table. this goes back to any network destination ID or any destination ID which is not directly stored in the routing table itself. if the router is tasked with sending a packet to 14.23.54.0/24 but does not have its information stored in its routing table, it'll send the packet directly to a destination (or gateway) of an ISP, so that the ISP takes care of the packet. this is used to cut off external workforce on a router. the only two scenarios where the default routes are not used is in the tier one backbone network or in internetworks which are meant to stay disconnected from the internet.
there are commands to check out your own routing table on your own system - the command for Linux-based systems is ip route. one interesting detail that caught my attention was i could view the routing table that made my virtual network tick. for example, running ip route on my host gave me this output:
192.168.122.0/24 dev virbr0 proto kernel scope link src 192.168.122.1
running ip route on lab1 (my first virtual machine which pings my second virtual machine, lab2) gave me this output:
lab1:~# ip route
default via 192.168.122.1 dev eth0  metric 202
192.168.122.0/24 dev eth0 scope link  src 192.168.122.154
this shows that the host runs a virtual bridge interface for the inner network to connect. the lab1 host is given the default route and also a route for any packet going to the 192.168.122.0 network ID. the source is dictated as the lab1 host ID, and the device and the scopes are also specified here - but compared to a more detailed windows description, i dont see much information here. another thing to notice is the 'metric' of a route - as the metric increases, the desire to use a route for the same destination decreases. the lower the mtric, the higher the desire for the router to route packets to the destination via said metric. this is a way to make sure that as long as the most optimal route is available, it is used and if that route suddenly stops working, then the other routes start being used depending on their metric value.
up until page 386, the book specifies how to read a route. i definitely recommend that you learn how to read a routing scheme as well, as it comes to play an enormous importance in learning routing.

finish page: 386
finish time 1855
study session 15 finishes here
