study session 14 starts here
start page: 369
start time: 1400

chapter seven starts with trying to explain the concept of routing. as we learned earlier, LANs mostly connect their nodes together in two methods; they either form closed networks which work completely by using switches and hubs using MAC addresses to let nodes communicate, or they use routers and the TCP/IP protocol suite - both of which play out to form a LAN which can connect to another LAN via routing capabilities of a router, forming a WAN. once multiple LANs are connected to each other, they make WANs, and their connection is pinned down via packet routing - a concept explained thoroughly in this chapter. and yes - by thoroughly, i mean 70 pages of the book dedicated to nothing but explaining what routing and other concepts such as dynamic packet routing are. as explained historically, routers are devices which enable connection between atleast two points (e.g. Network ID X and Network ID Y). these routers typically are installed in racks, but modern home routers might combine the technicality of a router, a switch, a firewall, a DHCP server and a lot more into one single package. overall, no matter how much a router comes in, its main purpose is to do one job: examine packets from one network and send it over to the other network. a switch which functions at more than one layer of the OSI model is called a multilayer switch, and in the CompTIA Network+ Exam, it might appear as an MLS. however, the way a router works is very interesting - the router receives packets from the wire, modifies the packet so that its layer 2 information is gone, inspects that information and based on the time the packet has been sent, it is queued directly unless it is a QoS packet in which a wide range and array of factors can come into play. the router then sends the packet directly to the port that the packet needs to be sent to based on using something called a routing table: a routing table is just a table of information which the router uses to recognize where a packet has to go. in the book, there are also more things covered regarding a routing table. a routing table consists of a few things: a network ID, a gateway, a genmask, flags, metrics and iface.
1. network ID: this is the network ID which is receiving the sent packets from a router. the router identifies where to send a packet using this section, and it is learned by how networks communicate - LANs work by taking multiple nodes and connecting them to a switch and connecting the switch to a router, where a node sends packets via another router to another network, then the router listens in for that specific network ID specified by the sender router.
2. gateway: this is used as the router IP address. if a communication is being done in a scenario where a network is already connected to the router which wants to send the IP to the other network, this field is left empty because the router itself is the one responsible for the data transmit.
3. genmask: the network subnet mask displayed as genmask.
4. flags: flags on a network are typically labled as U (up and running), H (route is host) and G (route is to the gateway). as for U, it means the route is up and working, while H means the route is a host - where the packets are being sent directly to a node on the network and as for G, it means the route is being sent to the gateway.
for a router to properly work, it'll need a network ID and a genmask. the router uses these two to determine how a given packet will be sent out to the other routers, or, to the destination (as mentioned the H flag indicates that the packet is probably from my guess being sent to directly a host on the network.. but wouldnt that still mean that the route needs to be done to the network's default gateway so the host on the network can get its packet?). with this information, the router uses the pre-defined or cahced routing tables in it and compares the given destination network ID and compares every single possible route to find the most beneficial one (dynamic packet routing). 

finish page: 378
finish time 1628
study session 14 finishes here
